--Chapter 5
I wake up with a jolt when the alarm clock goes off at 6:15 a.m.. My jaw still hurts from clenching it all night. The dismal prospects of the upcoming Phoenix launch were never far from my mind.

As usual, before climbing out of bed, I quickly scan my phone for any bad news. Usually, I would spend about ten minutes replying to e-mails—it always feels good to lob a couple of balls off my side of the court.

I see something that makes me bolt upright so abruptly that I wake up Paige. “Oh, my God. What, what?” she asks frantically, not fully awake.

“It’s another e-mail from Steve. Hang on, darling…” I say to her, while I squint to read it.

From: Steve Masters

To: Bill Palmer

Cc: Nancy Mailer, Dick Landry

Date: September 4, 6:05 AM

Priority: Highest

Subject: URGENT: SOX-404 IT Audit Findings Review

Bill, please look into this ASAP. I don’t need to tell you how critical it is to have a clean SOX-404 audit.

Nancy, please work with Bill Palmer, who is now in charge of IT Operations.

Steve

>>> Begin forwarded message:

We just concluded our Q3 internal audit in preparation for the upcoming SOX-404 external audit. We discovered some very concerning deficiencies that we need to discuss with you. Due to the severity and urgency of the findings, we need to meet with IT this morning.

Nancy

Indeed, there’s a two-hour meeting scheduled for 8 a.m. on my calendar, set up by Nancy Mailer, Chief Audit Executive.

Holy crap. She is incredibly smart and formidable. Years ago during the retail acquisition integration, I watched her grill a manager from the business we were acquiring. He was presenting their financial performance, when she started a rapid-fire interrogation, like a cross between Columbo, Matlock, and Scarface.

He quickly broke, admitting that he was exaggerating his division’s performance.

Recalling that meeting, my armpits feel damp. I haven’t done anything wrong. But given the tone of the e-mail, she is clearly hot on the trail of something important, and Steve just threw me in her path.

I’ve always run a very tight ship in my Midrange Technology group. This kept Audit from interfering too much. Sure, there would still be a lot of questions and documentation requests, requiring us to spend a few weeks collecting data and preparing responses. Occasionally, they would find something, but we would quickly fix it.

I like to think that we built a mutually respectful working relationship. However, this e-mail portends something more ominous.

I look at my watch. The meeting is in ninety minutes, and I don’t have a clue about what she wants to talk about.

“Shit!” I exclaim, as I jostle Paige’s shoulder. “Honey, can you drive the kids into school today? Something really bad just came up involving the Chief Audit Executive and Steve. I need to make some phone calls and get to the office right away.”

Annoyed, she says, “For two years you’ve always taken the kids on Thursdays! I have an early start today, too!”

“I’m sorry, honey. This is really important. The CEO of the company asked me to handle this. Steve Masters. You know, the guy on TV and who gives the big speeches at the company holiday party? I can’t drop another ball after a day like yesterday. And the newspaper headline the night before that—”

Without a word, she storms down the stairs.

When I finally find the conference room for the 8 a.m. meeting, I immediately notice how silent it is, devoid of the usual small talk that fills the time while attendees trickle in.

Nancy sits at the head of the table, with four other people sitting around her. Sitting next to her is John along with his ever-present, black three-ring binder. As always, I’m surprised by how young he is. He’s probably in his mid-thirties with thick, curly black hair.

John has a haggard look about him, and like many college students, has continually gained weight in the three years he’s been here at Parts Unlimited. Most likely from all the stress associated with his failing moral crusade.

John actually reminds me more of Brent than anyone else in the room. However, unlike Brent who normally wears a Linux T-shirt, John wears a starched, collared shirt that’s slightly too large.

Wes is conspicuously underdressed compared to everyone in the room, but he obviously doesn’t care. The last person in the room is a young man who I don’t recognize, presumably the IT auditor.

Nancy begins, “We have just concluded our Q3 internal audit in preparation for the upcoming external SOX-404 audits. We have a grave situation. Tim, our IT auditor, found an eye-opening number of IT control issues. Worse, many are repeat findings going into the third year. Left unresolved, these findings may force us to conclude that the company no longer has sufficient controls to assert the accuracy of its financial statements. This could result in an adverse footnote from the external auditors in the company 10-K filings with the US Securities and Exchange Commission.

“Although these are only preliminary findings, due to the gravity of the situation, I have already verbally informed the audit committee.”

I blanch. Although I don’t understand all the audit jargon, I know enough that this could ruin Dick’s day and mean potentially more bad front-page news.

Satisfied that I understand the severity of the situation, Nancy nods. “Tim, please walk us through your conclusions.”

He takes out a huge stack of stapled papers, handing one out to everyone assembled. “We have just concluded our audit of the IT general controls at Parts Unlimited for all of the critical financial systems. It took a team of four people over eight weeks to create this consolidated report.”

Holy crap. I lift the two-inch thick stack of papers in my hand. Where did they find a stapler this big?

It’s a printed Excel spreadsheet, with twenty rows per page in tiny eight-point type. The last page is numbered page 189. “There must be a thousand issues here!” I say in disbelief.

“Unfortunately, yes,” he responds, not entirely able to hide his smug satisfaction. “We found 952 IT general control deficiencies, of which sixteen are significant deficiencies and two are potential material weaknesses. Obviously, we’re very alarmed. Given how soon the external audit starts, we need your remediation plan as soon as possible.”

Wes is hunched over the table, one hand on his forehead, the other hand flipping through page after page. “What kind of horseshit is this?”

He holds up one page. “ ‘Issue 127. Insecure Windows operating system MAX_SYN_COOKIE setting’? Is this a joke? In case you haven’t heard, we’ve got a real business to run. Sorry if that interferes with this full-time audit employment racket you’ve got going on here.”

Trust Wes to say what people are thinking but are too smart to actually say aloud.

Nancy responds gravely, “Unfortunately, at this point, the phase of control review and testing is over. What we require from you now is the ‘management response letter.’ You need to investigate each of these findings, confirm them, and then create a remediation plan. We’ll review it and then present to the audit committee and the board of directors.

“Normally, you would have months to prepare your response letter and execute your remediation plan,” she continues, suddenly looking apologetic. “Unfortunately, the way the audit testing calendar worked out, we only have three weeks until the external auditors arrive. That’s regrettable. We’ll make sure to give IT more time in the next audit cycle. But this time around, we require your response by…”

She looks at her calendar. “One week from Monday, at the very latest. Do you think you can make it?”

Oh, shit.

That’s just six working days away. We’ll need half that time just to read the entire document.

Our auditors, who I’ve long believed are a force for justice and objectivity, are crapping on me, too?

I pick up the huge stack of papers again and look at a couple of random pages. There are many entries like Wes read, but others have references to inadequate security settings, presence of ghost login accounts, change control issues, and segregation of duties issues.

John flips his three-ring binder open and says officiously, “Bill, I brought up many of the same issues with Wes and your predecessor. They convinced the CIO to sign a management waiver, stating that he accepted the risk, and do nothing. Given that some of these are now repeat audit findings, I don’t think we’ll be able to talk our way out of it this time.”

He turns to Nancy. “During the previous management regime, IT controls clearly weren’t a priority, but now that all the security chickens are coming home to roost, I’m sure Bill will be more prudent.”

Wes looks at John with contempt. I can’t believe John is grandstanding in front of the auditors. It’s times like this that make me wonder whose side he’s really on.

Oblivious to Wes and me, John says to Nancy, “My department has been remediating some other controls, which I think we should be given credit for. For starters, we’ve completed the tokenization of the PII on our critical financial systems, so at least we dodged that bullet. That finding is now closed.”

Nancy says dryly, “Interesting. The presence of PII is not in the scope of the SOX-404 audit, so from that perspective, focusing on the IT general controls might have been a better use of time.”

Wait. John’s urgent tokenization change was for nothing?

If that’s true, John and I need to talk. Later.

I say slowly, “Nancy, I genuinely don’t know what we can get to you by Friday. We’re buried in recovery work and are scrambling to support the upcoming Phoenix rollout. Which of these findings are the most important for us to respond to?”

Nancy nods to Tim, who says, “Certainly. The first issue is the potential material weakness, which is outlined on page seven. This finding states that an unauthorized or untested change to an application supporting financial reporting could have been put into production. This could potentially result in an undetected material error, due to fraud or otherwise. Management does not have any control that would prevent or detect such a change.

“Furthermore, your group was also unable to produce any change management meeting minutes, which is supposed to meet weekly, according to your policy.”

I try not wince visibly, recalling that no one even showed up at the CAB meeting yesterday, and during the payroll incident, we were so oblivious to John’s tokenization change that we ended up bricking the SAN.

If we were clueless about those changes, I sincerely doubt that we’ d notice if someone disabled a control that would enable a minor, say, $100 million fraudulent transaction.

“Really? That’s unbelievable! I’ll look into that.” I say with what I hope is the right amount of surprise and moral outrage. After I pretend to take detailed notes on my clipboard, circling and underlining random words, I nod, prompting Tim to continue.

“Next, we found numerous instances where developers have administrative access to production applications and databases. This violates the required segregation of duty required to prevent risk for fraud.”

I look over to John. “Really? You don’t say. Developers making changes to an application without an approved change order? That certainly sounds like a security risk. What would happen if someone coerced a developer, say Max, into doing something unauthorized? We’ve go to do something about that, right, John?”

John turns bright red, but says politely, “Yes, of course. I agree and would be happy to help.”

Tim says, “Good. Let’s move onto the sixteen significant deficiencies.”

A half hour later, Tim is still droning on. I stare glumly at the huge stack of findings. Most of these issues are just like the huge, useless reports we get from Information Security, which is another reason why John has such a bad reputation.

It’s the never-ending hamster wheel of pain: Information Security fills up people’s inboxes with never-ending lists of critical security remediation work, quarter after quarter.

When Tim finally finishes, John volunteers, “We must get these vulnerable systems patched. My team has a lot of experience patching systems, if you require assistance. These audit findings are an awesome opportunity to close some big security holes.”

“Look, both of you guys have no idea what you’re asking for!” Wes says to John and Tim, clearly exasperated. “Some of the servers that those manufacturing ERP systems run on are over twenty years old. Half the company will grind to a halt if they go down, and the vendor went out of business decades ago! These things are so fragile that if you even look at them at the wrong time of day, they’ll crash and require all sorts of voodoo to get them to successfully reboot. They’ll never survive the changes you’re proposing!”

He leans over the table, putting his finger in John’s face. “You want to patch it yourself, fine. But I want a signed piece of paper from you saying that if you push the button and the entire business grinds to a halt, you’ll fly around and grovel to all the plant managers, explaining to them why they didn’t hit their production targets. Deal?”

My eyes widen with amazement when John actually leans forward into Wes’ finger and says angrily, “Oh, yeah? How about when we’re on the front page of the news because we lost consumer data that we’re responsible for protecting? You’ll personally apologize to the thousands or millions of families whose data are now being sold by the Russian Mafia?”

I say, “Settle down, everyone. We all want to do what’s right for the company. The trick is figuring out what we have time to do and what systems can actually be patched.”

I look at the stack of papers. Wes, Patty, and I can assign people the task of investigating each issue, but who will actually do the work? We’re already buried with Phoenix, and I fear that this new massive project might be the straw that breaks the camel’s back.

I say to Nancy, “I’ll get with my team right away, and we’ll come up with a plan. I can’t promise you that we’ll have our response letter completed by then, but I can promise you that we’ll get you everything we can. Will that be adequate?”

“Quite so,” Nancy says amicably. “Going through the preliminary audit findings and identifying next steps were the only objectives for this meeting.”

As the meeting adjourns, I ask Wes to stay behind.

Noticing this, John remains behind, as well. “This is a disaster. All my objectives and bonuses are tied to getting a clean compliance report for the SOX-404 and PCI audits. I’m going to fail because you Ops guys can’t get your shit together!”

“Join the club,” I say.

To get him off my back, I say, “Sarah and Steve decided to move up the Phoenix deployment date to next Friday. They want to skip all the security reviews. You probably should talk to Chris and Sarah right away.”

Predictably, John swears and storms out, slamming the door behind him.

Exhausted, I lean back in my chair and say to Wes, “This is just not our week.”

Wes laughs humorlessly. “I told you that the pace of things around here would make your head explode.”

I gesture at the audit findings. “We’re supposed to protect all our key resources for Phoenix, but that’s sucking in everybody. We don’t have a bunch of people just sitting on the bench we can throw at the audit findings, right?”

Wes shakes his head, his face uncharacteristically pinched with tension.

He flips through his stack of papers again. “We’re definitely going to need to bring the technology leads into this. But as you said, they’re already assigned to the Phoenix team. Should we reassign them here?”

I honestly don’t know. Wes stares at one of the pages for a moment. “By the way, I think a bunch of these will require Brent.”

“Oh, come on.” I mutter. “Brent. Brent, Brent, Brent! Can’t we do anything without him? Look at us! We’re trying to have a management discussion about commitments and resources, and all we do is talk about one guy! I don’t care how talented he is. If you’re telling me that our organization can’t do anything without him, we’ve got a big problem.”

Wes shrugs, slightly embarrassed. “He’s undoubtedly one of our best guys. He’s really smart, and he knows a lot about almost everything we have in this shop. He’s one of the few people who really understand how all the applications talk together at an enterprise level. Heck, the guy may know more about how this company works than I do.”

“You’re a senior manager. This should be as unacceptable to you as it is to me!” I say firmly. “How many more Brents do you need? One, ten, or a hundred? I’m going to need Steve to prioritize all this work. What I need from you is what resources we need. If I ask Steve for more resources, I don’t want to have to crawl back, begging for more later.”

He rolls his eyes. “Look, I’ll tell you right now what’s going to happen. We’ll go to management and present our case. Not only will they say no, they’ll cut our budget by another five percent. That’s what they’ve done for the past five years. In the meantime, everyone will continue to want everything at the same time, and keep adding to our list of things to do.”

Exasperated, he continues, “And just so you know, I have tried to hire more Brents. Because I never got the budget, I eliminated a bunch of positions just so I could hire four more very senior engineers at the same level of experience as Brent. And you know what happened?”

I merely raise my eyebrows.

Wes says, “Half quit within a year, and I’m not getting anywhere near the productivity I need from the ones who stayed. Although I don’t have data to prove it, I’m guessing Brent is even more behind than ever. He complains that he had to spend a bunch of time training and helping the new guys, and is now stretched thinner than ever. And he’s still in the middle of everything.”

I respond, “You said that people ‘add stuff to our list.’ What does the list look like right now? Where can I get a copy? Who owns the list?”

Wes replies slowly, “Well, there are the business projects and the various IT infrastructure projects. But a lot of the commitments just aren’t written down.”

“How many business projects? How many infrastructure projects?” I ask.

Wes shakes his head. “I don’t know offhand. I can get the list of business projects from Kirsten, but I’m not sure if anyone knows the answer to your second question. Those don’t go through the Project Management Office.”

I have a sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach. How can we manage production if we don’t know what the demand, priorities, status of work in process, and resource availability are? Suddenly, I’m kicking myself that I didn’t ask these questions on my first day.

Finally, I’m thinking like a manager.

I call Patty. “Wes and I just got hammered by audit and they need a response one week from Monday. I need your help to figure what all our work commitments are, so I can have an intelligent discussion with Steve about resourcing. Can you talk?”

She says, “That’s right up my alley. Come on over.”

After Wes briefs Patty on the implications of the mammoth audit report that he thumped down on the table, she whistles.

“You know, I really wish you were at that meeting with the auditors,” I say. “Most of the biggest issues were around the absence of a functional change management process. I think you could end up being the auditors’ best friend.”

“Auditors have friends?” she laughs.

“I need you to help Wes estimate the work to fix the audit findings by Monday,” I say. “But right now, let’s talk about a higher level issue. I’m trying to get the list of what all our commitments to the organization are. How big is that list and how do things get on it?”

After hearing what Wes told me, Patty replies, “Wes is right. Kirsten owns the official business project list, almost all of which have something that we’re on the hook for. We have our own IT Operations projects, which are typically managed by the technology budget owner—there is no centralized list of those projects.”

Patty continues, “We also have all the calls going into the service desk, whether it’s requests for something new or asking to fix something. But that list will be incomplete, too, because so many people in the business just go to their favorite IT person. All that work is completely off the books.”

I ask slowly, “So, you’re saying that we have no idea what the list of our commitments is? Really?”

Wes says defensively, “Until now, no one ever asked. We’ve always hired smart people and tasked them with certain areas of responsibility. We’ve never had to manage things beyond that.”

“Well, we need to start. We can’t make new commitments to other people when we don’t even know what our commitments are now!” I say. “At the very least, get me the work estimate to fix the audit findings. Then, for each of those resources, tell me what their other commitments are that we’re going to be pulling them off of.”

Thinking for a moment, I add, “For that matter, do the same thing for every person assigned to Phoenix. I’m guessing we’re overloaded, so I want to know by how much. I want to proactively tell people whose projects have been bumped, so they’re not surprised when we don’t deliver what we promised.”

Both Wes and Patty look surprised. Wes speaks up first, “But…but we’ d have to talk with almost everyone! Patty may have fun grilling people on what changes they’re making, but we can’t go around wasting the time of our best people. They’ve got real work to do!”

“Yes, I know they have real work to do,” I say adamantly. “I merely want a one-line description about what all that work is and how long they think it will take!”

Realizing how this might come across, I add, “Make sure you tell people that we’re doing this so we can get more resources. I don’t want anyone thinking that we’re outsourcing or firing anyone, okay?”

Patty nods. “We should have done this a long time ago. We bump up the priorities of things all the time, but we never really know what just got bumped down. That is, until someone screams at us, demanding to know why we haven’t delivered something.”

She types on her laptop. “You just want a list of organizational commitments for our key resources, with a one-liner on what they’re working on and how long it will take. We’ll start with all Phoenix and audit remediation resources first, but will eventually cover the entire IT Operations organization. Do I have it right?”

I smile, genuinely happy that Patty has framed it so succinctly. I know she’s going to do a great job. “Exactly. Bonus points if you and Wes can determine which resources are most overutilized and how many new resources we need. That would be the basis of an ask to Steve for more staffing.”

Patty says to Wes, “This should be pretty straightforward. We can put together fifteen-minute interviews, pull data from our service desk and ticketing system, get Kirsten’s project list…”

Surprisingly, Wes agrees, adding, “We could also look in our budgeting tools to see how we’ve coded personnel and hardware requests.”

I stand up. “Great thinking, guys. Get a meeting set up for us to go over what you find, no later than Friday. I want to have a meeting with Steve on Monday, armed with some real data.”

She gives me the thumbs-up. Now we’re getting somewhere.

--Chapter 6
In another one of the endless Phoenix status meetings, I realize that the developers are even more behind than we feared. As Wes had predicted, more and more work is being deferred to the next release, including almost all of the testing.

This means that we’ll be the ones finding the problems when they blow up in production, instead of the Quality Assurance (QA) Department.

Great.

During a lull in the discussion, I look down at my phone and see an e-mail from Patty. She wants to meet about resourcing, promising some eye-opening surprises.

I open the attached spreadsheet, seeing an encouraging level of detail, but on my minuscule phone screen, I can’t make heads or tails of it. I reply to Patty that I’m on the way and ask her to have Wes meet me there.

When I arrive, I’m surprised to see that Wes has set up a projector, displaying a spreadsheet on the wall. I’m excited that we’re meeting to analyze the situation, instead of just reacting to the daily fires.

I grab a seat. “Okay, whatcha got for me?”

Wes starts. “Patty did a great job putting this together. What we found was—well, it was interesting.”

Patty explains, “We did our interviews, collected the data, and then did our analysis. Right now, these numbers are only for our key resources. We’re already seeing something troubling.”

She points at a row in the spreadsheet. “First, we have a lot of projects. Kirsten says she’s officially managing about thirty-five major business projects, each of which we have commitments to. Internal to IT Operations, we’ve already identified over seventy projects, and that number keeps growing with each person we interview.”

“Wait,” I say, genuinely startled, sitting upright in my chair. “We have 150 IT Operations people, right? If you’ve already found over 105 projects, that’s 1.5 people per project. Doesn’t that seem like a lot to you?”

Wes replies, “Totally. And we know that the project count is low. So by the end, it’ll probably be more like one person per project. That’s insane.”

I ask, “How big are these internal projects?”

Wes switches tabs on the spreadsheet, showing the list of projects they’ve inventoried, along with the estimated number of man-weeks. “Consolidate and upgrade e-mail server,” “Upgrade thirty-five instances of Oracle databases,” “Install supported Lemming database server,” “Virtualize and migrate primary business applications,” and so on.

I groan. While some projects are small, most seem like major undertakings, estimated at three man-years or more.

When Patty sees the expression on my face, she says, “That was my reaction, too. We’re on the hook for a huge number of projects. So, let’s look at what our capacity is. This is a little harder, since we can’t just assign random people to any given project.”

She continues, “When we looked at who was assigned to each project and what their other commitments and availability were, here’s what we found.”

When Wes flips to another spreadsheet tab, my heart drops.

“Grim, huh?” says Wes. “Most of our resources are going to Phoenix. And look at the next line: Compliance is the next largest project. And even if we only worked on compliance, it would consume most of our key resources for an entire year! And that includes Brent, by the way.”

Incredulous, I say, “You’re kidding. If we put all our projects on hold except for the audit findings, our key resources would be tied up for an entire year?”

“Yep,” Patty says, nodding. “It’s hard to believe, but it just shows you how much work is in that stack of audit findings.”

I look down at the table, speechless.

If someone had shown me these figures during my first conversation with Steve, I would have run from the room, screaming like a little boy.

It’s not too late, I think, smiling at the image.

With practiced calm, I say, “Okay, knowing is always better than not knowing. Keep going.”

Wes looks back at the spreadsheet. “The third largest item is incident and break-fix work. Right now, it’s probably consuming seventy-five percent of our staff’s time. And because these often involve critical business systems, incidents will take priority over everything else, including Phoenix and fixing audit findings.

“By the way, did you know that yesterday, when we were talking with Brent, we had to reschedule the interview twice because he had to go help fix an outage? So there we were interrupting him from Phoenix work, only to be interrupted by an outage!” he says, laughing.

I start to laugh, but then stop abruptly. “Wait. What outage? Why didn’t I hear about it? We can’t keep running our organization like this!”

“Well, it was another SAN issue, but nothing critical,” Wes replies. “A drive went bad a couple of months ago, so the SAN was running with no redundancy. When another drive failed, the entire volume went down. Brent had to help restore some of the databases when we got the SAN back up.”

Exasperated, I shout, “Dang it, Wes. That was completely preventable! Get one of your junior guys to look at the logs every day for drive failures. Maybe even have him visually inspect the drives and count all the blinking lights. It’s called preventive maintenance for a reason! We need Brent on Phoenix, not piddly shit like this!”

Wes says defensively, “Hey, it’s actually a little more complicated than that. We put in the order for replacement drives, but they’ve been stuck in Procurement for weeks. We had to get one of our vendors to give it to us on credit. This wasn’t our fault.”

I lose my temper. “Wes, listen to me. I DON’T CARE! I don’t care about Procurement. I don’t care how nice your inept vendors are. I need you to do your job. Make sure this doesn’t happen again!”

I take a deep breath. I realize my frustration is not because of the drive failure, but because we’re continually unable to stay focused on the things that matter most to the company.

“Look, let’s put this aside for now,” I say, looking back at Wes. “I’m serious about getting someone to look at that SAN daily, though. Set up a meeting sometime next week for you, me, and Patty to get to the bottom of these outages. We’ve got to figure out how to bring down the amount of break-fix work so we can get project work done. If we can’t get Phoenix work done, it’s jeopardizing the company.”

“Yeah, I got it. I’ll try to get it in before the Phoenix rollout.” Wes says, nodding sullenly. “And I’ll get on that SAN issue this afternoon.”

“Okay, back to the spreadsheet,” I say.

Patty observes glumly, “You’re right. The one consistent theme in the interviews was that everyone struggles to get their project work done. Even when they do have time, they struggle to prioritize all their commitments. People in the business constantly ask our staff to do things for them. Especially Marketing.”

“Sarah?” I ask.

“Sure, but it’s not only her,” she replies. “Practically every executive in the company is guilty of going directly to their favorite IT person, either asking a favor or pressuring them to get something done.”

“How do we change the game here and get resourced to do all these projects properly?” I ask. “What should we be asking Steve for?”

Wes scrolls down his spreadsheet. “Based on our rough numbers, we’ll probably need to hire seven people: three database administrators, two server engineers, one network engineer, and one virtualization engineer. Of course, you know that it’ll take time to find these people and then another six to twelve months before they’re fully productive.”

Of course, I knew that new hires aren’t productive right away. But it was still dispiriting to hear Wes point out that real help was still a long way off, even if Steve approved the headcount.

Later that day, as I’m walking to our second CAB meeting, I feel hopeful. If we can get our old change process going, we might be able to quickly resolve one of the largest audit issues and get some operational wins, as well.

I’m also pleased at how well Patty and Wes are working together.

As I near the conference room, I hear loud voices arguing.

“—then Patty got that engineer fired for doing his job. He was one of our best networking people. That wasn’t your call to make!”

No mistake. That’s Wes hollering. Then I hear Patty reply heatedly, “What? You signed off on that termination! Why is this suddenly my fault?”

I knew it was too good to be true.

I then hear John say, “That was the right call. We’re going into our third year of a repeat audit finding around change controls. That goes in front of the audit committee. Next time around, it probably won’t be just an engineer getting fired, if you get my drift.”

Wait. Who invited John to this meeting?

Before John can make things any worse, I quickly step through the door and say cheerfully, “Good afternoon, everyone! Are we ready to review some changes?”

Fourteen people turn to look at me. Most of the technical leads from the various groups are sitting at the table. Wes is standing up behind his chair, fuming, while Patty is standing in the front of the room, arms crossed.

John sits in the back of the room, with his three-ring binder open, very much an unwanted guest.

Using both hands, I set down my antique laptop. It hits the table with a thud and a clatter as the battery falls off, the tape no longer holding it in place, and then I hear a scratching sound as the disk drive spins down.

Wes’ angry expression disappears momentarily. “Wow, boss, nice gear. What is that, a Kaypro II? I haven’t seen one of those in about thirty years. Let me know if you need an 8-inch floppy to load CP/M on it—I’ve got one in my attic at home.”

Two of the engineers snicker and point. I smile briefly at Wes, grateful for the comic relief.

Remaining standing, I say to everyone, “Let me tell you why I assembled all of you here. Given the urgency of Phoenix, you can bet your ass that I wouldn’t waste your time if I didn’t think this was important.”

I continue, “First, the events that led to the SAN and payroll failure on Tuesday must not happen again. What started off as a medium-sized payroll failure snowballed into a massive friendly-fire SAN incident. Why? Because we are not talking to one another about what changes we’re planning or implementing. This is not acceptable.”

“Second, John is right. We spent yesterday morning with our auditors, discussing a bunch of deficiencies they found,” I continue. “Dick Landry is already crapping bricks because it could impact our quarterly financial statements. We need to tighten up our change controls, and as managers and technical leads, we must figure out how we can create a sustainable process that will prevent friendly-fire incidents and get the auditors off our back, while still being able to get work done. We are not leaving this room until we’ve created a plan to get there. Understood?”

When I’m satisfied that everyone has been properly cowed, I open it up for discussion. “So what’s preventing us from getting there?”

One of the technical leads quickly says, “I’ll start. That change management tool is impossible to use. There’s a million mandatory fields and most of the time, the drop down boxes for the ‘applications affected’ don’t even have what I need. It’s why I’ve stopped even putting in change requests.”

Another lead hollers out, “He’s not kidding. To follow Patty’s rules, I have to manually type in hundreds of server names in one of the text boxes. Most of the time, there’s not enough room in the field! A hundred server names are supposed to fit in a sixty-four-character text box? What idiot built that form?”

Again, more unkind laughter.

Patty is bright red. She shouts, “We need to use drop-down boxes so we can maintain data integrity! And I’d love to keep the application list up-to-date, but I don’t have the resources. Who’s going to keep the application catalog and change management database current? You think it just magically updates itself?”

“It’s not just the tool, Patty. It’s the entire broken process,” Wes asserts. “When my guys put in change requests, they have to wait a lifetime to get approvals, let alone get on the schedule. We have the business breathing down our neck to get crap done. We can’t wait for you to hem and haw, complaining that we didn’t fill out the form right.”

Patty snaps, “That’s crap, and you know it. Your people routinely break the rules. Like, say, when everyone marks all their change requests as an ‘urgent’ or ‘emergency change’. That field is only for actual emergencies!”

Wes retorts, “We have to do that, because marking them urgent is the only way to get your team to look at it! Who can wait three weeks for an approval?”

One of the lead engineers suggests, “Maybe we make another field called ‘extremely urgent?’ ”

I wait until the uproar quiets down. At this rate, we’re getting nowhere fast. Thinking furiously, I finally say, “Let’s take a ten-minute break.”

When we reconvene the meeting, I say, “We are not leaving this meeting without a list of authorized and scheduled changes that we’re implementing in the next thirty days.

“As you can see, my assistant has brought in a pile of blank index cards. I want each group to write down every change they’re planning, one change per index card. I want three pieces of information: who is planning the change, the system being changed, and a one-sentence summary.

“I’ve drawn a calendar on the whiteboard where we will eventually post approved changes according to their scheduled implementation,” I continue. “Those are the rules. Short and simple.”

Wes picks up a pack of cards, looking at them dubiously. “Really? Paper cards, in this day and age? How about we use that laptop of yours, which probably even predates paper?”

Everyone laughs, but not Patty. She looks angry, obviously not pleased with the direction things are going.

“This isn’t like any change management process I’ve ever seen,” John says. “But I’ll put my changes on the board, like the upcoming firewall updates and monitoring changes that’re scheduled for the next couple of days.”

Surprisingly, John’s willingness to jump in inspires others, who begin writing their planned changes on their cards.

Finally, Wes says, “Okay, let’s try it. Anything is better than using that busted change management tool.”

One of the leads holds up a handful of cards. “I’m done with all the database changes we’re planning to make.”

When I nod for him to proceed, he quickly reads one of the cards: “Execute the vendor-recommended database maintenance script on Octave server XZ577 to fix retail store POS performance issues. This affects the order entry database and applications. We’ d like to do this next Friday evening at 8:30 p.m.”

I nod, pleased with the clarity of his proposed change. But Wes says, “That’s not a change! That’s just running a database script. If you were changing the script, then we’ d have something to talk about. Next.”

The lead replies quickly, “No, it’s definitely a change. It temporarily changes some database settings, and we don’t know what production impact it could have. To me, it’s just as risky as a database configuration change.”

Is it a change or not? I can see both sides of the argument.

After thirty minutes of arguing, it’s still not clear that we know the definition of what a “change” should be.

Was rebooting a server a change? Yes, because we don’t want anyone rebooting servers willy-nilly, especially if it’s running a critical service.

How about turning off a server? Yes, for the same reason.

How about turning on a server? No, we all thought. That is, until someone came up with the example of turning on a duplicate DHCP server, which screwed up the entire enterprise network for twenty-four hours.

A half hour later, we finally write on the whiteboard: “a ‘change’ is any activity that is physical, logical, or virtual to applications, databases, operating systems, networks, or hardware that could impact services being delivered.”

I look at my watch, alarmed that we’ve been in the room for nearly ninety minutes, and we still haven’t even approved our first change. I push us to move faster, but at the end of our two-hour meeting, we’ve only posted five changes on the whiteboard.

Surprisingly, no one else seems frustrated except me. Everyone is vigorously engaged in the discussion, even Patty. Everyone is discussing risks of the proposed changes, even discovering that one change wasn’t necessary.

Encouraged, I say, “We’ll pick this up on Monday. Get all your cards to Patty as soon as you can. Patty, what’s the best way for us to process all the cards?”

She says tersely, “I’ll set up a basket later today. In the meantime, pile them up at the front of the table.”

When we adjourn, several people tell me on their way out, “Great meeting,” and “I wish we had more time to discuss changes,” and “I’m looking forward to Monday.”

Only Patty has remained behind, arms crossed. “We spent a lot of blood, sweat, and tears creating our old change management policy, and everyone still blew it off. What makes you think this will be any different?”

I shrug. “I don’t know. But we’ll keep trying things until we have a system that works, and I’m going to make sure everyone keeps helping us get there. It’s not just to satisfy the audit findings. We need some way to plan, communicate, and make our changes safely. I can guarantee you that if we don’t change the way we work, I’ll be soon out of a job.”

Pointing at her old policy document, she says, “We shouldn’t just throw all this work out the window. We spent weeks designing it and hundreds of thousands of dollars with consultants, changing our tools around.”

She tears up slightly. I remind myself of how long she’s been trying to get this process integrated into the organization.

“I know that there was a lot of good work put into all this process,” I say sympathetically. “Let’s face it, though. No one was actually following it, as the auditors pointed out. We also know that people were gaming the system, just trying to get their work done.”

I say sincerely, “We may be starting over, but we need all your experience and skills to make this work. It’s still your process, and I know this is absolutely critical to our success.”

“Okay,” she says, sighing in resignation. “I suppose I care more about our survival than whether we use our old process or not.”

Her expression changes. “How about I write up the outputs of the meeting and the new instructions for submitting requests for changes?”

Later that afternoon, I’m back in the Phoenix war room when Patty calls. I run out to the hallway. “What’s up?”

She sounds stressed. “We’ve got a problem. I was expecting we’ d have fifty changes for us to review next week. But we’re already up to 243 submitted changes. I keep getting e-mails from people saying to expect more cards over the weekend… I think we’re looking at over four hundred changes being made next week!”

Holy crap. Four hundred? How many of these four hundred changes are high risk, potentially affecting Phoenix, the payroll application, or worse?

I suddenly remember Rangemaster duty in the Marines. As Rangemaster, I was responsible for the safety of everyone on the firing range. I have a horrifying vision of a mob of four hundred unsupervised eighteen-year-olds jumping out of trucks, running to the firing range, firing their rifles into the air, hooting and hollering…

“Umm, at least people are following the process,” I say, laughing nervously.

I hear her laugh. “With all the change requests coming in, how are we going to get them all authorized by Monday? Should we put a temporary hold on changes until we get them all approved?”

“Absolutely not,” I say immediately. “The best way to kill everyone’s enthusiasm and support is to prevent them from doing what they need to do. I doubt we’ll get a second chance to get this right.

“Send out an e-mail telling everyone to submit any change for next week by Monday. Monday’s changes will not need to be authorized but changes for the remainder of the week will. No exceptions.”

I can hear Patty typing over the phone. “Got it. I’ll probably need to have some of my people help organize all of the change cards over the weekend. Frankly, I’m stunned by how many changes there are.”

So am I.

“Excellent,” I say, leaving my concerns unvoiced.


--Chapter 7

When I get back to my desk, I’m looking for the Advil I usually keep on my desk when my cell phone rings. “Palmer here,” I say, rummaging through my drawers.

“Hi, Bill. It’s Stacy—Steve’s assistant. I’m glad I caught you. There’s a potential new board member in town named Erik Reid who needs to talk with all the IT executives. He’s wondering if you’re available for an hour right now.”

“Hang on a sec while I pull up my calendar,” I reply.

The screen resolution on this old laptop is so low that the weekly view is unusable. I switch to the daily view, and the screen goes blank as the laptop chatters and whirs.

I give up waiting and say earnestly, “Look, I know this is important, but can’t this wait until Monday? You would not believe the day I’m having.”

She replies quickly, “I wish it could wait, but he’s only in town today. And from what I’ve seen, Bob Strauss, you know, the new company chairman, and Steve are in a tizzy because they’re worried that Erik may not accept our offer to join the board. He’s apparently some technology hotshot, and Bob and Steve managed to get him in town to woo him. He insists on meeting the IT leadership team before he leaves.”

“Okay, I’m in,” I say, suppressing a sigh.

“Good. We have him set up in the conference room right by me. Come on over—there’s a great coffee and doughnut spread here.”

I laugh. “Well, that’s the first good news I’ve had all day. I’m on my way.”

As I walk into the conference room in Building 2, I wave to Stacy, pondering the strange world I’ve been pulled into. I’m not used to being thrown into the middle of board politics.

As promised, by the window is a large cart with four types of coffee and six boxes of Vandal Doughnuts, a place in town so famous, there’s a long line at almost all hours of the day.

A man in wrinkled khaki pants and an untucked denim button-down shirt is kneeling in front of the cart, unpacking the doughnuts onto two platters. I had no idea Vandal Doughnuts delivered.

I pick up a cup and start filling it with coffee, eyeing all the doughnuts. I say, “You know, my wife and I are huge fans of you guys. Back when we were dating, almost every Friday night we’ d wait in line for twenty minutes to get our fix. Now that we have kids, she just sends me out to get them for her. Maybe I’ll take one home for her tonight.”

I grab a huge chocolate doughnut covered with Froot Loops, as well as a giant frosted glazed doughnut with bacon on it and three more that look tasty.

The deliveryman stands up and looks at me, smiling. “Yeah, I can see why. I’m really enjoying these doughnuts. I’ve never had anything like them before. I’ve probably eaten five since I’ve been here. Not great for the low-carb diet I’m on, though…”

Holding out his hand, he says, “I’m Erik.”

Holy crap.

I look down. In one hand I have a cup of coffee, and in the other hand I’m holding an overflowing plate.

“Oh, jeez,” I say hurriedly. I put everything on the table behind me, turning around again to shake his hand. “Good to meet you. I’m Bill—Bill Palmer.”

I look him over again. He has a mustache, is around six feet tall and a bit overweight, and has long graying hair that touches his shoulders. When standing, he looks even more like someone from a delivery company than a potential board member, let alone some “technology hotshot.”

Taking another look at him, I correct myself—I’m pretty sure a delivery person would have less-wrinkled clothes.

“No worries,” he says cheerily, grabbing another doughnut from the tray and gesturing toward the table. “Have a seat. I was hoping to talk with each of the IT leaders while I was in town. Of course, I had to talk with Steve and—umm—what’s your CFO’s name? Darren? Dale? Whatever—they seemed like nice enough fellows. Maybe a little blind, but…”

He gestures dismissively. “I talked with your Development guy, too. Umm, Cary? Calvin? And, I’ll be talking with your Security guy next, Jimmy, and your Retailing person, Sylvia.”

I try to hide my pained expression as he’s managed to mangle everyone’s name.

“I see… And what have your impressions been so far?” I ask carefully.

He stops chewing and brushes some crumbs off his mustache, pausing to think. “It looks like you’re in a world of hurt. IT Operations seems to have lodged itself in every major flow of work, including the top company project. It has all the executives hopping mad, and they’re turning the screws on your Development guy to do whatever it takes to get it into production.”

He looks me in the eye. “You’re having chronic IT availability issues, causing company executives to be splashed on the front-page news. And now, Audit is hot on your tail, meaning more possible front-page news, and maybe even an adverse footnote on the quarterly financial statement. And anyone who knows anything about Phoenix knows that there’s a lot more bad news to come on that front…”

As he’s talking, I feel my face flush red, whether in anger or embarrassment I’m not sure.

“Things don’t look so good for you, pal,” he says. “At least not to a prospective board member, who’s supposed to oversee and assess your performance.”

I purse my lips, resisting the urge to say something that sounds defensive. I say neutrally, “Steve asked me to take this job three days ago. Even though I kept saying no, he eventually convinced me to accept the position. There’ve sure been a lot of surprises…”

He looks at me for a moment, and then guffaws. “Yeah, I’ll bet!” he says, disarmingly. “Ha-ha! Surprises. So, what’s your game plan for righting the ship?”

I look up for a moment, trying to figure out how to describe the few corrective actions I’ve put in place after this week. I reply, “Honestly, I’m still trying to get some situational awareness. Mostly, I’m being whiplashed from one emergency to another. I do know that we need more rigor and discipline in how we work. I’m trying to figure out what processes we rely on to get work done around here. Based on what I’ve seen, I know we need to improve them so we stop shooting ourselves in the foot.”

I think for a moment. “That’s just to get us out of firefighting mode. I’m still trying to figure out how to resource an audit remediation project that just fell out of the sky. Based on what I’ve seen, we’re seriously behind on our commitments. We’re obviously going to need more people or get a lot more efficient to get all our committed work done.”

Erik frowns. “ ‘Rigor and discipline,’ huh? I’m guessing you were a non-commissioned officer in the military. An E-6. No, you’re too young. An E-5, right?”

I blink in surprise. “That’s right. E-5, US Marine Corp. How did you know?”

“Lucky guess,” he says glibly. “For one thing, you sure don’t look like a chemical engineer or an auditor.”

“What?” I ask.

“You’re right that you can’t achieve the strategic until you’ve mastered the tactical,” he says, ignoring my question. “But what worked for you in the Marines will never work here, considering how they run this circus. Instead of one general in your chain of command, you’ve got ten generals calling the shots here, and all of them have a direct line to each and every private in your company.“

I say slowly, “Wait. You’re saying rigor and discipline don’t matter?”

“Of course they matter,” he says sternly. “But you have a much bigger problem, and it has nothing to do with your argle-bargle of ‘efficiencies’ and ‘process.’ Your problem right now is that you obviously don’t actually know what ‘work’ is.”

I stare at him.

Who is this buffoon? For a moment, I wonder whether I can assign Wes or Patty to deal with this guy, but Steve obviously wanted me to handle this personally.

“I know what work is,” I say slowly. “We do it every day. If we can’t keep the lights on and finish the work that the business requires, I’m out of a job.”

“What then, exactly, is your definition of ‘work?’ ” he asks, with a genuinely curious expression on his face.

“Well, I can tell you that Steve has stated over and over to me in no uncertain terms that we need to get Phoenix out the door. That qualifies as work in my mind.”

He looks up, appearing to have a conversation with himself. “Yes, that’s certainly one type of work. But you’re still missing the three other types of work that IT Operations is responsible for. To me, that’s nowhere near the level of understanding of work you need in order to fix your problems around project deliverables, outages, and compliance.”

He stands up. “Grab your stuff. We’re going for a ride.”

Confused and annoyed, I look at my watch. It’s 4:17 p.m. I have too much to do to waste much more time with this guy.

Then he’s gone. I look out in the hallway, but he’s not there, either. I look at Stacy questioningly, and she points toward the elevators. I run to catch up with him.

He’s walked into an elevator that just opened. When he turns around, he holds the door open for me. “You probably don’t even see when work is committed to your organization. And if you can’t see it, you can’t manage it—let alone organize it, sequence it, and have any assurance that your resources can complete it.”

I frown, recalling my last meeting with Wes and Patty when they struggled to come up with the list of all our commitments to the organization. I say, “What is this? Some kind of intelligence test?”

“Yes, you could say that,” he replies. “But don’t worry. It’s not just you. Steve has to pass his intelligence test, too. And for that matter, Dick, as well.”

I follow him to his blue subcompact rental car and we drive five minutes to MRP-8, one of our manufacturing plants. It’s enormous, probably four times bigger than my building, but this one is in immaculate condition, with some obvious recent renovations and add-ons.

A security guard in her late fifties greets us, “Good afternoon, Dr. Reid. How nice to see you! How are you doing? It’s been a long time.”

Erik shakes her hand warmly, replying with a wink, “Great seeing you again, Dorothy. We’re just here to get a birds-eye view of the plant floor. Can we still get on the catwalk?”

She replies with a flirtatious smile, “It’s closed to most people, but for you, I think we can make an exception.”

I look at Erik suspiciously. He supposedly couldn’t get anyone’s name right, and yet he apparently remembers the name of some security guard from years past. And no one ever mentioned anything about a Dr. Reid.

After climbing five flights of stairs, we’re standing on a catwalk that overlooks the entire plant floor, looking like it goes on for at least two city blocks in every direction.

“Look down there,” he says. “You can see loading docks on each side of the building. Raw materials are brought in on this side, and the finished goods leave out the other. Orders come off that printer down there. If you stand here long enough, you can actually see all the WIP, that’s ‘work in process’ or ‘inventory’ for plant newbies, make its way toward the other side of the plant floor, where it’s shipped to customers as finished goods.”

“For decades at this plant,” he continues, “there were piles of inventory everywhere. In many places, it was piled as high as you could stack them using those big forklifts over there. On some days, you couldn’t even see the other side of the building. In hindsight, we now know that WIP is one of the root causes for chronic due-date problems, quality issues, and expediters having to rejuggle priorities every day. It’s amazing that this business didn’t go under as a result.”

He gestures broadly with both arms outstretched, “In the 1980s, this plant was the beneficiary of three incredible scientifically-grounded management movements. You’ve probably heard of them: the Theory of Constraints, Lean production or the Toyota Production System, and Total Quality Management. Although each movement started in different places, they all agree on one thing: WIP is the silent killer. Therefore, one of the most critical mechanisms in the management of any plant is job and materials release. Without it, you can’t control WIP.”

He points at a desk near the loading docks closest to us. “See that desk over there?”

I nod but also look pointedly at my watch: 4:45 p.m.

Oblivious to my impatience, he says, “Let me tell you a story. Decades ago, there used to be a guy named Mark. He was the supervisor for that first work center, right down there by that desk. Those racks hold the folders for incoming jobs. Isn’t it amazing that those folders look exactly like they did back then?

“At any rate,” he continues, “one day I see Mark picking up a folder to start some job. I ask him, ‘On what basis did you choose that job, versus any of the others?’

“And you know what he tells me? He says, ‘It’s a job that requires this work center first. And we’re open.’ ”

He shakes his head incredulously. “I could hardly believe it. I tell him, ‘Your station is just the first of twenty operations. You don’t factor the availability of any of the other nineteen stations in your decision?’ And he replies, ‘Well, no. This is the way I’ve done it for twenty years.’ ”

He laughs. “I suppose to him, it sounds like a reasonable way to pick which job to perform. He’s keeping the first station busy, and it’s similar to first-in, first-out scheduling. But of course, now everyone knows that you don’t release work based on the availability of the first station. Instead, it should be based on the tempo of how quickly the bottleneck resource can consume the work.”

I just stare at him blankly.

He continues, “Because of how Mark was releasing work, inventory kept piling up in front of our bottleneck, and jobs were never finished on time. Every day was an emergency. For years, we were awarded Best Customer of the Year from our air freight shipment company, because we were overnighting thousands of pounds of finished goods to angry customers almost every week.”

He pauses and then says emphatically, “Eliyahu M. Goldratt, who created the Theory of Constraints, showed us how any improvements made anywhere besides the bottleneck are an illusion. Astonishing, but true! Any improvement made after the bottleneck is useless, because it will always remain starved, waiting for work from the bottleneck. And any improvements made before the bottleneck merely results in more inventory piling up at the bottleneck.”

He continues, “In our case, our bottleneck was a heat treat oven, just like in Goldratt’s novel, The Goal. We also had paint-curing booths that later became constraints, too. By the time we froze the release of all new jobs, you couldn’t even see the bottleneck work centers because they were surrounded by huge piles of inventory. Even from up here!”

Despite myself, I laugh with him. It’s obvious in hindsight, but I can imagine that to Mark, it was anything but obvious. “Look, thanks for the history lesson. But I learned most of this already in business school. I don’t see how this could possibly be relevant to managing IT Operations. IT is not like running a factory.”

“Oh, really?” he turns to me, frowning intensely. “Let me guess. You’re going to say that IT is pure knowledge work, and so therefore, all your work is like that of an artisan. Therefore, there’s no place for standardization, documented work procedures, and all that high-falutin’ ‘rigor and discipline’ that you claimed to hold so near and dear.”

I frown. I can’t figure out if he’s trying to convince me of something I already believe or trying to get me to accept an absurd conclusion.

“If you think IT Operations has nothing to learn from Plant Operations, you’re wrong. Dead wrong,” he says. “Your job as VP of IT Operations is to ensure the fast, predictable, and uninterrupted flow of planned work that delivers value to the business while minimizing the impact and disruption of unplanned work, so you can provide stable, predictable, and secure IT service.”

Listening to him, I wonder if I should be writing this down.

He studies me closely. “Well, I can see that we’re not ready to have this discussion. Until you gain a better understanding of what work is, any conversation we have about controlling work will be totally lost on you. It would be like talking about acrobatics to someone who doesn’t believe in gravity yet.

“Rest assured, though,” he says, pointing at the job release desk, “in order to get to where you want to go, eventually you will need to figure out what your equivalent to that desk is. You must figure out how to control the release of work into IT Operations and, more importantly, ensure that your most constrained resources are doing only the work that serves the goal of the entire system, not just one silo.

“Once you figure this out, young Bill, you will be well on your way toward understanding the Three Ways,” he says. “The First Way helps us understand how to create fast flow of work as it moves from Development into IT Operations, because that’s what’s between the business and the customer. The Second Way shows us how to shorten and amplify feedback loops, so we can fix quality at the source and avoid rework. And the Third Way shows us how to create a culture that simultaneously fosters experimentation, learning from failure, and understanding that repetition and practice are the prerequisites to mastery.”

Although he now sounds oddly like Master Shifu in the movie Kung Fu Panda, I’m listening intently. The need for rigor and discipline, and constantly practicing and honing our skills are important lessons I’ve kept with me from the Marines. The lives of my men depended upon it there, and my job depends upon it here. Creating that predictability is what I’m most intent on instilling in my IT Operations group.

Erik hands me a slip of paper with a phone number on it. “Remember, there are four types of work. You’ve named business project work as one. When you have the other three, give me a call.”

He takes out his car keys from his pocket and asks, “Do you want a lift back to your office?”

It’s 5:10 p.m. when I finally get back to my cubicle. I log back into my clunker laptop to reply to e-mails. But I can’t concentrate.

The last hour with Erik was like being in a strange parallel universe. Or like being forced to watch a psychedelic movie made in a drug-induced haze.

What did Erik mean that there were four categories of work?

I think back to my meeting with Wes and Patty. Wes mentioned we have a separate list for IT infrastructure projects and business projects. Are infrastructure projects another type of work?

As I ponder this, an e-mail notification window pops up on my screen, indicating another e-mail expecting a response.

Are e-mails another type of work?

I doubt it. At the plant, Erik gestured to the entire plant floor. When he mentioned “work,” he seemed to mean it at an organizational level not at the level of an individual contributor or manager.

I think about it some more. Then I shake my head and quickly e-mail Steve, letting them know that I connected with Erik. I’m certain that a decade from now, I’ll be telling my friends about my brief encounter with the raving madman on the manufacturing plant floor.

I need to get moving. Paige will be seriously annoyed if I come home late on a Friday night. When I undock the laptop from the docking station, an incredibly loud alarm pierces the air.

“Holy crap!” I shout, realizing that the sound is coming from my laptop. Fumbling, I try to turn down the volume, to power it off, but nothing makes the sound stop.

Frantically, I flip the laptop over and try to take the battery out, but the tape keeps it attached. I grab a letter opener, finally managing to slash the tape and get the battery out.

The laptop finally goes silent.

--Chapter 8

I spent all weekend working on a PowerPoint slide deck for my meeting with Steve this morning. Despite all that work, I wish I could have done more to prepare.

I force myself to relax, visualizing having a healthy and vigorous business discussion with him, walking out with everything I ask for. I keep reminding myself how important this is for the company and my organization. Everyone worked so hard to prepare for this and now success or failure depends on how well I can communicate it all to Steve.

Stacy smiles when I arrive and says warmly, “Go on in. I’m sorry we could only get you thirty minutes.”

I stop just inside the door, where Sarah is sitting with Steve at the table. Sarah is telling Steve, “—you did an amazing job telling the story of where we’re going. These were some of the most skeptical analysts around, but they clearly got excited. You’ve also given them a reason for us to talk again when Phoenix goes live. They also seem pretty impressed with the Phoenix roadmap.”

They’re telling analysts about the Phoenix roadmap? With so many features being delayed to the next release, I question the wisdom of making insufficiently informed promises to the market.

Steve just nods and replies happily, “Let’s see if it changes their impressions of us. Good job scheduling the call. Catch you later today for the next one.”

Sarah gives me a smile and says, “Hey, Bill. You’re up and at it early today, aren’t you?”

Gritting my teeth, I just ignore her comment. “Good morning, everyone.” Trying to show an interest, I say, “Sounds like you had a good call.”

Sarah smiles even more broadly. “Yes, they’re really excited about our vision and agree that it’s going to be a real game changer for us. This is what we need to change how we’re perceived by the broader market and Wall Street.”

I look levelly at her, wondering whether these briefings that we give the outside world might be what is causing such pressure on Chris’ team to release features so prematurely.

I grab a seat across from Steve. I can’t quite turn my back on Sarah, but I do my best.

I don’t want to give Steve my handouts until Sarah has left the room, but she continues to talk with Steve, recounting their meeting and how to change the talk track for their next analyst call.

As they talk, all I can think of is how she’s eating into my time with Steve.

Eleven minutes later, Steve laughs at a joke from Sarah, and she finally leaves the office, closing the door behind her. Steve turns to me and says, “Sorry about going over—our next Phoenix analyst briefing is in twenty minutes. So, what’s on your mind?”

“You’ve impressed upon me from the very beginning that I need to help maximize the probability of success of the Phoenix rollout,” I start. “Based on my observations of the past week, we are stretched dangerously thin, to the point that I believe Phoenix is in considerable jeopardy.

“I’ve had my staff establish what our levels of demand and capacity truly are,” I continue. “We’ve started to inventory everything we’re being asked to do, regardless of how big or small. Based on the analysis so far, it’s clear to me that the demand for IT work far exceeds our ability to deliver. I’ve asked them to make more visible what the pipeline of work looks like, so we can make more informed decisions about who should be working on what and when.”

With as much gravitas as I can muster, I say, “One thing is very clear, though. We are definitely understaffed. There’s no way that we can deliver everything we’ve promised. Either we need to cut down the project list, or we’ve got to staff up.”

Trying to replicate the reasoned and logical argument I’ve spent all weekend rehearsing, I continue, “The other big problem is that we have too many different projects competing for our attention. You’ve been consistent and clear that Phoenix is the most important, but we can’t seem to keep resources dedicated to it. For instance, last Thursday, internal audit delivered to us a set of findings that we must investigate and assemble a response letter for in one week. Doing so will impact Phoenix.”

I’ve been watching Steve as I talked, and so far, he’s remained expressionless. I look at him calmly and ask, “What I’d like to get out of our meeting is an understanding of the relative priority of Phoenix versus the audit findings and to talk about the number of projects and how to adequately staff them.”

In my mind, I’ve done a good job of being the competent and passionate manager who is dispassionately struggling to decide how to best serve the business, without making moral judgments.

Steve replies in an exasperated voice, “What kind of bullshit prioritization question is this? If I went to my board and told them that I need to do either sales or marketing, and asked them which of those I should do, I’d be laughed out of the room. I need to do both, just like you need to do both! Life is tough. Phoenix is the top company priority, but that doesn’t mean you get to hold the SOX-404 audit hostage.”

I count to three before saying, “Obviously, I’m not being clear. Both Phoenix and the compliance project share certain key resources, such as Brent. The compliance project alone would tie up these people for a year, but we need them focused on Phoenix. On top of that, our infrastructure is so fragile, that we have daily failures, which often require these same resources to restore normal operations. If a similar outage to the payroll run failure happened today, we’ d likely have to pull Brent off both the Phoenix and compliance work to figure out what went wrong.”

I look at him dead-on and say, “We’ve looked at different resourcing options, including hiring and moving people around, but none of them will have any effect fast enough to make a difference. If Phoenix is really the top priority, we need to put some of the compliance work on hold.”

“Out of the question,” he says, before I can even finish. “I’ve seen that big pile of audit findings, and we will be in very hot water if we don’t get those issues fixed.”

This is definitely not going according to plan. “Okay…” I say slowly. “We’ll do our best, but let me state for the record that we’re too understaffed to do a good job on either one, let alone both.”

I wait for him to acknowledge my point. Seconds go by before he finally nods.

Realizing this is probably the best I’m going to get, I indicate to the first page of the handout I gave him. I say, “Let’s zoom up and talk about project demand and capacity. We’re currently supporting over thirty-five business projects through Kirsten’s Project Management Office, and at current count, seventy-plus other smaller business projects and internal initiatives. And there are others out there that we just haven’t counted yet. With our 143 IT Operations people, nothing is getting done as promised.”

I point him to the second page of the handout, saying, “As you can see, my team and I have come up with a request for six additional resources that we’re most short-handed on.”

I go for the close, saying, “My goal is to increase our throughput so we won’t be in this position again, and to get as many of these projects done as we can. I’d like your approval to get these openings immediately, so we can start our search. Talent like Brent is not easy to find, and we need to start sooner rather than later.”

In my rehearsals, this is when Steve would run his finger down the figures, ask me some questions, and we’ d have a meaningful discussion about how to make the best trade-offs. Maybe he’d even pat me on the back and compliment me on the quality of my analysis.

But Steve doesn’t even pick up my handouts. Instead, he looks at me and says, “Bill, Phoenix is already $10 million over budget, and we must get cash-flow positive soon. You have some of the most expensive resources in the entire company. You have to use what you’ve got.”

He crosses his arms and continues, “Last year, we had some IT analysts come in and benchmark our company against our peers. They told us that we’re spending way more on IT than our competitors.

“You may think that with three thousand employees, six more employees won’t make a difference. But, trust me, every expense is under scrutiny. If I can’t close the profitability gap, I’ll have to do another layoff. Your math of adding another $2 million in labor costs just doesn’t work.”

He continues in a more sympathetic voice. “My suggestion to you? Go to your peers and make your case to them. If your case is really valid, they should be willing to transfer some of their budget to you. But let me be clear: Any budget increases are out of the question. If anything, we may have to cut some heads in your area.”

I spent hours role-playing worst-case scenarios over the weekend. Apparently, I’m going to have to practice being more pessimistic.

“Steve, I don’t know how I can be more clear about this,” I say, feeling a little desperate. “This stuff isn’t magic. All this work being piled on us is done by real people. Commitments like the compliance work are made without any regard for what’s already on people’s plates, like Phoenix.”

Realizing I have little to lose, but trying to shock some sense into him, I say, “If you really care about closing the gap with the competition by having Phoenix succeed, you sure aren’t acting like it. To me, it seems like you’re just being suckered to rush to the gunfight late, showing up with only a knife.”

I expected some kind of reaction but he merely leans back, crossing his arms in front. “We’re all doing our best. So you better go back and do the same.”

Just then, the door opens as Sarah walks in. “Hi, Steve. Sorry to interrupt, but we have the next analyst call in two minutes. Shall I dial us in?”

Shit. I look down at my watch. 9:27.

She even robbed me of my last three minutes.

Utterly defeated, I finally say, “Okay, got it. Keep pushing. I’ll keep you posted.”

Steve nods in thanks, and then turns to Sarah as I close the door behind me. On my way out, I toss the presentation I had worked on all weekend into Stacy’s recycling bin.

I try to wave away the stench of failure as I walk to the CAB meeting. I’m still thinking about how I’m going to break the bad news to Wes and Patty when I walk into the conference room that Patty has coined the Change Coordination Room.

All thoughts of Steve disappear when I see what’s there.

Almost every area of the wall is now covered in whiteboards. Index cards cover nearly every inch of the whiteboards on two of the walls. It’s not just one deep—in some places there are hooks attached to the board, with ten cards hanging off them.

On the conference room table are twenty, maybe even thirty, more piles of cards.

On the far side of the table, two guys who work for Patty have their backs to us, studying a card. After a moment, they tape it between two other cards in front of them.

“Holy crap,” I say.

“We’ve got a problem.” Patty says from behind me.

“Not enough space for more whiteboards?” I say, only half joking.

Before Patty answers, I hear Wes enter the room. “Holy shit!” he says. Where did all these cards come from? Are they all for this week?”

I turn to ask him, “Are you surprised? Most of these are coming from your group.”

He looks around at all the boards and then at the cards on the table, “I knew that my guys were really busy, but, there must be a couple of hundred changes here.”

Patty turns her laptop around to show us the spreadsheet she has open, “Since last Friday afternoon, there have been 437 changes submitted for this week.”

Wes for once is speechless. He finally shakes his head and says, “And now we’re supposed to go through and approve all of them? This meeting was only scheduled for an hour—we’ d need days to go through all of these!”

He looks at me. “Mind you, I’m not saying that we shouldn’t, but if we’re going to do this every week…”

Again, Wes stops speaking, overwhelmed at the task in front of us.

Quite honestly, I feel the same way. Apparently, getting all the managers to submit their changes for the week was just the first step. I didn’t expect that the process would fall apart as we went beyond collecting the data and actually set out to process and authorize the changes.

I force myself to say cheerfully, “This is a great start. Like most things, things get worse before they get better. We’ve got enthusiastic support from the technical managers, so now we’ve got to figure out how to get these changes scrutinized and scheduled on an on-going basis. Any ideas?”

Patty is first to speak up. “Well, no one says that we have to be the ones reviewing all the changes—maybe we can push down some of these to delegates.”

I listen to Wes and Patty trade ideas back and forth before I say, “Let’s go back to our goals: get the left and right hands to know what the other is doing, give us some situational awareness during outages, and give audit some evidence that we’re addressing change control.

“We need to focus on the riskiest changes,” I continue. “The 80/20 rule likely applies here: Twenty percent of the changes pose eighty percent of the risk.”

I stare again at piles of cards in front of us and pick up a couple at random, searching for some inspiration.

Holding up a card that has a big frowny face drawn on it, I ask, “What’s PUCCAR?”

“That worthless app,” Wes says with disgust, “is the Parts Unlimited Check Clearing and Reconciliation application that someone implemented almost two decades ago. We call it ‘pucker’ because every time we change it, it blows up, and no one knows how to fix it. The vendor went out of business during the dot-com boom, but we’ve never gotten funding to replace it.”

I ask, “If we know it’s that prone to crashing, why do we need to change it?”

Wes says quickly, “We try not to. But sometimes the business rules change, and we also have to keep it patched. It’s running an operating system that’s out of maintenance, so it’s always dicey…”

“Good! It’s a risky change. What other types of changes are being submitted like PUCCAR?” I ask.

We make a pile of nearly fifty cards proposing changes to the Rainbow, Saturn, and Taser applications, and also changes to the network and certain shared databases, which could impact a significant portion, or even all, of the business.

“Even looking at those cards makes my heart palpitate,” Wes says. “These are some of the dangerous changes we make around here.”

He’s right. I say, “Okay, let’s mark all of these as ‘fragile.’ These are high risk and must be authorized by the CAB. Patty, changes like this should be at the top of the pile during our meetings.”

Patty nods, taking notes saying, “Got it. We’re predefining high-risk categories of change that not only must have change requests submitted, but must have authorization before being scheduled and implemented.”

We quickly create a list of the top ten most fragile services, applications, and infrastructure. Any change request that could affect any of these will be immediately flagged for CAB scrutiny.

Patty adds, “We need to create some standard procedures around these changes—like when we’ll want them implemented—and have key resources not only aware of them but also standing by, just in case things go wrong—even the vendors.”

She adds with a half smile, “You know, like having firefighters and ambulances lined up on the runway, ready to spray safety foam when the airplane lands in flames.”

Wes laughs and adds wryly, “Yeah, in the case of PUCCAR, have the coroner stock up on a bunch of body bags, too. And a PR person ready to handle the angry phone calls from the business, saying that some customers were allergic to the foam we used.”

I laugh. “You know, that’s an interesting idea. Let’s let the business choose the foam. There’s no reason why all the responsibility should rest on our shoulders. We can send an e-mail out to the business ahead of time and ask when the best implementation time would be. If we can give them data on the outcomes of previous changes, they may even withdraw the change.”

Patty is typing away. “Got it. For these types of changes, I’ll have my staff generate some reports on the changes’ success rates and any associated downtime. This will help the business make more informed decisions around the changes.”

I’m extremely pleased with Patty’s idea and am confident that we’re on the right track. “Okay, that still leaves four hundred cards to go. Any ideas?”

Wes has been going through the cards methodically, creating two big stacks of cards next to him. He picks a card from the bigger pile, “This pile has changes we do all the time. Like this one about the monthly tax table upload to the POS systems. I don’t think we should suspend any of these changes.

“On the other hand, these changes are stuff like ‘increasing the Java application server thread pool size,’ ‘installing the Kumquat vendor application hotfix to resolve performance issue,’ and ‘resetting the Kentucky data center load balancer to default duplex settings.’

“What the hell do I know about these things?” Wes says. “I just don’t know enough about the context to have an actual opinion. I don’t want to be like a seagull, flying in, crapping on people, and then flying away, you know?”

Excited, Patty says, “Excellent! The first ones are the low-risk changes that ITIL calls ‘standard changes.’ For changes we’ve done many times before successfully, we just preapprove. They still need to be submitted, but they can be scheduled without us.”

When everyone nods, she continues, “That leaves about two hundred changes that are medium-risk changes that we still need to look at.”

“I agree with Wes,” I respond. “For these, we need to trust that the manager knows what he or she is doing. But I’d like Patty to verify that people have appropriately informed anyone they could affect, and gotten the ‘okay to proceed’ from all of them.”

I think for a moment and say, “Take John’s tokenization application. Before that change request would even come to us, I would expect him to get the nod from the application and database owners, and also the business. If he’s done that, that’s good enough for me. I view our role as making sure that he’s dotted the i’s and crossed the t’s. At this level, I care more about the integrity of the process, not so much about the actual changes.”

Patty is typing away. “Let me see if I’ve got this right: For the ‘messy middle changes,’ we’re deciding that the change submitter has responsibility and accountability for consulting and getting approval from people potentially affected. Once they do that, they submit their change card for us to review and approve for scheduling.”

I smile and say, “Yep. Work for you, Wes?”

At last, he says, “I think it’ll work. Let’s give it a shot.”

“Good,” I say. Then I say to Patty, “You can help make sure the change requesters are actually doing all the work beforehand?”

Patty smiles and says, “With pleasure.”

She looks up at the board, tapping a pen on the table while she thinks. She says, “Today is Monday. We’ve already said today’s changes are cleared for implementation. I propose we extend the amnesty period through tomorrow, and assemble a full CAB meeting for Wednesday, with the intent of scheduling the rest of the changes. That should give everyone enough time to prepare.”

I look at Wes. He says, “This is good, but I’m already thinking about next week. We should tell everyone to keep the change requests coming in, and let’s set up the weekly CAB meetings starting Friday the nineteenth.”

Patty looks as pleased as I am that Wes is planning ahead to the following week, instead of griping. She says, “I’ll have instructions sent to everyone in the next couple of hours.”

After she finishes typing, she adds, “One last thing. I just want to point out that we’re tying up two people, as well as myself, running this manual process. It’s very labor intensive. Eventually, we’re going to have to think about some way to automate this.”

I nod. “No doubt that this isn’t sustainable in its current form. But let’s get a couple of CAB meetings under our belt and nail down what exactly the rules are. I promise you that we’ll revisit this.”

The meeting winds down and we all leave smiling. That’s a first for my team.
